# assembly and implementation documentation

### definitions:

Branch: a RELATIVE jump

Jump: an ABSOLUTE jump

.
### Quirks/features:
any instruction with a greater than 32 "immediate" without the immediate bit set raises a -1 value interrupt (or unsigned, 4294967295)

immediates are always sign extended from 16 bits to 32 bits
16 bit immediates are sign extended to 48 bit for branches

no paging, everything is one continuous space
there are no different operating modes. 
the cpu is going to be multi-core, with one thread per core, and one program per thread. (two cores required at minimum)

PC is 64-bit and counts by four.
branches also go by instruction, with current instruction included for backwards branches

.
### interrupts

Interrupts jump to a manually set address, unique to each of the 256 interrupts.

interrupts also set the special INTE register which can be read from with a READ instruction.

### name and value
| name | value | info |
| ---- | ----- | ----------------- |
| cs | 0 | sets the previous context value. return to go back to the last used context |
| reserved | 1-2 | RESERVED. DO NOT USE. |
| keyboard | 3 | sets the inte register to the key pressed |
| reserved | 4-14 | RESERVED. DO NOT USE. |
| cycle_count | 15 | counts cycles. should only be used as a safety check |
    

.
### flags

refer to **hidden registers** and **memory map.md**

.
### Registers

32x 32 bit wide registers. no zero register, though r0 is generally kept at 0

r30 and r31 are hardwired to be the **pointer** register, with the upper 16 bits of r31 being ignored for this

.
### special registers (inacessible by instructions directly except where needed for the instruction to function):
    interrupt registers:
        interrupt index (48 bit) (set by the INTE instruction)
        keyinte (48 bit) (set by KEY instruction) (denotes where the keyboard interrupts trigger execution)
        
    misc:
        carry flag (1 bit) (generated by ADD,AWC,SUB,and SWC instructions)
        stack pointer (16 bit) (increments by one, bit shifted to access 32 bit chunks)
        function pointer (16 bit) (increments by one, bit shifted to access 64 bit chunks)
        context pointer (8 bit) (points to the current working context)
        
        
    conditional registers: (set via a CMP instruction and used in any conditional branch)
        EQ (1 bit)
        less (1 bit)
        low (1 bit)


### Instruction set (in opcode order)

    ALU 		#all alu operations work on two registers and return to a third register.
    add		#add 
    awc		#add with carry flag
    sub		#subtract
    swc		#subtract with carry flag
    nand	#bitwise NAND
    and		#bitwise AND
    rol		#rotate left
    ror		#rotate right
    
    COND		#branches and jumps
    jum		#jump always. 
    bra		#branch always. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    beq		#branch if a and b are equal. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    bne		#branch if a and b are not equal. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    bg		#branch if a is greater than b. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    bl		#branch if a is less than b. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    ba		#branch if a is above b. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    bb		#branch if a is below b. takes one register argument as the amount to branch (signed).
    
    EXTRA 	#various extras, mainly for the OS

    load    #load a byte from program memory/ram/mmio
    store   #store a byte to program memory/ram/mmio
    cmp     #compare two registers, or a register and an immediate.
    call    #call to the pointer, pushing pc
    ret     #return from a function or interrupt
    inte    #set the interrupt index for a particular interrupt value
    lui     #load upper immediate to a register
    key     #set the instruction for keyboard interrupts to jump to

    read    #read an interrupt value to a register
    jaltp   #jump and link to pointer
    cstime  #set the number of cycles before a context switch happens (is rounded down to the nearest power of two)
    cs      #context switch to immediate, switches which register bank we're working with. there are 256 register banks
    cache   #cache one page (256 bytes) of memory into the chip's cache. raises an interrupt when done
    shovel  #shovel a page of cache back to ram.
    time    #takes an immediate and register argument. immediate decides wether to use the lower half(0) or the upper half(1).
    
    
### instructions are formatted like this: 

    opcode rs1,rs2,rd
    or
    opcode rs1,immediate,rd


some instructions don't use these though.
    
    branches only take a register/immediate amount to branch, as well as LLP, LUP, and STORE
    
    IOIO, CALL,and RET take zero arguments
    
    LPC,LUPC, PULL, LOAD, and KEY all take one register destination argument
    
    and lastly CMP takes two register arguments or a register and an immediate.


